JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: President-elect
Donald Trump adds two new names to work for
him in the White House.
Then: another big winner on Election Day,
marijuana.
We explore the new legal landscape.
And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks analyze the
week's news.
All that and more on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President-elect Donald Trump
has added two more names to his White House
staff.
The announcement came today from Palm Beach,
Florida, where Mr. Trump is spending the holiday.
Kathleen "K.T."
McFarland was appointed deputy national security
adviser.
She's worked in several Republican administrationsand as a FOX News analyst.
And Donald McGahn will be White House counsel.
He served as the Trump campaign's attorney.
Neither appointment is subject to Senate confirmation.
In a separate development, Green Party leader
Jill Stein filed a petition formally requesting
a presidential vote recount in Wisconsin to
ensure the results were not manipulated.
It is expected to begin late next week.
Similar challenges are also being preparedin Pennsylvania and Michigan.
In the day's other news: The death toll from
a massive truck bombing in Southern Iraq rose
to at least 73.
At least 40 of the dead were said to be Shiite
pilgrims from Iran.
The Islamic State claimed that it carried
out the suicide attack last night at a gas
station near the city of Hillah.
It is the worst ISIS attack in Iraq since
July.
A train collision in Northern Iran has killed
at least 43 people, and injured 100 more.
State TV reports that a moving train derailed
and caught fire after striking a parked train
on a main rail line.
Injured passengers flooded an area hospitalin zero -- subzero temperatures.
Firefighters in Israel worked today to contain
the worst of more than a dozen wildfires.
The largest forced 60,000 people to evacuatearound the city of Haifa.
Planes dumped retardant today, but it was
too late to save hundreds of homes.
Meanwhile, police arrested a dozen people,amid allegations of terrorism.
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU, Israeli Prime Minister
(through translator): There are elements of
terror here, no doubt, elements with great
hostility toward the state of Israel.
We cannot tell yet if this is organized, but
we can see a number of cells operating.
I don't know if there is a connection between
them, and such a connection isn't even necessary.
It could be a terror of knives, and it could
be a terror of fires.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So far, there have been no
reports of deaths or serious injuries.
The president of Turkey threatened today to
reopen the flow of Middle Eastern and African
migrants into Europe.
Recep Tayyip Erdogan spoke a day after the
European Parliament called for freezing talks
to admit Turkey to the European Union.
That Parliament vote was aimed at Erdogan's
political and news media crackdown since a
failed coup in July.
In Bulgaria, violent clashes broke out between
migrants and police last night, leading to
some 400 arrests.
Officials said more than 2,000 asylum-seekers
rioted after being confined to their camp
over a health scare.
Demonstrators threw rocks and set trash on
fire.
Police fired tear gas and rubber bullets.
Bulgaria's prime minister vowed today to punish
those responsible.
BOYKO BORISSOV, Bulgarian Prime Minister (through
translator): We have everything filmed, and
all these acts of vandalism committed.
All migrants who took part will be charged.
A small group will be banned and can immediately
be extradited.
The others, who all behaved brutally and violated
public order, will be relocated to closed-door
refugee camps.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, in Greece, two migrants,
including a young boy, were killed in a fire
at a camp on the island of Lesbos.
Police said it was sparked by a gas stove.
Hurricane Otto weakened to a tropical storm
and headed into the Pacific Ocean after crossing
Central America.
The storm battered Nicaragua and Costa Ricaand killed at least nine people.
Otto was an unusually strong late-season hurricane.
In some places, as much rain fell in a few
hours as normally falls in a month.
Back in this country, a federal judge ruled
the man accused of a massacre at a Charleston,
South Carolina, church is competent to stand
trial.
Dylann Roof allegedly killed nine black churchgoers
in June of 2015.
He faces federal counts of hate crimes and
obstruction of religion.
He will eventually face a separate trial on
state murder charges.
Wall Street worked a half-day, but hit more
record closes, as the post-election rally
continued.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained almost69 points to finish at 19152.
The Nasdaq rose 18 points, and the S&P 500
added eight.
It is up 4 percent this month.
For the week, all three indexes grew about
1.5 percent.
And one of television's most beloved moms,
Florence Henderson, has died in Los Angeles
of heart failure.
She gained enduring fame as Carol Brady on
the 1970s sitcom "The Brady Bunch," but she
also had success on Broadway.
Her roles included the female lead in "Oklahoma"
and "The Girl Who Came to Supper."
Florence Henderson was 82 years old.
Still to come on the "NewsHour": a look at
the new legal landscape for marijuana; Shields
and Brooks on the week's news; and author
Michael Chabon on his latest novel.
President-elect Donald Trump continues to
fill positions in his administration over
this Thanksgiving holiday weekend.
John Yang has more on one with added significance.
JOHN YANG: To examine the role of the White
House counsel and the challenges Donald McGahn
faces tackling president-elect Trump's business
holdings, we're joined by Jack Quinn, who
was White House counsel under President Bill
Clinton.
Jack Quinn, welcome.
JACK QUINN, Former White House Counsel: Thank
you, John.
JOHN YANG: When a White House counsel approaches
an issue like figuring out what to do with
a president's business holdings, is the client
the president as a individual or the presidency
as an institution?
JACK QUINN: It's definitely the latter.
As White House counsel, you represent the
office of the president of United States,
not the individual, whether it's Bill Clinton
or Donald Trump.
JOHN YANG: So, in this case, the counsel may
be looking at having to tell the president
as an individual maybe he can't do what he
wants or maybe what he wants to do isn't a
good idea?
JACK QUINN: That's right.
And the White House counsel is in the one
who is in a position to invoke executive privilege,
for example.
A White House counsel cannot participate in
a private litigation involving a president
in his individual capacity and use that power
to influence the outcome of the litigation.
That would be inappropriate.
And while it's true that the president is
exempt in certain senses from the conflict
of interest rules, as are other federal officials,
for good reason, that is not a blank check,
so to speak.
There are other governors on the conduct of
the presidency.
The president may not accept emoluments, or,
in other words, economic benefits, from foreign
powers, still has to file disclosure of his
financial information, and, most importantly,
ultimately, is governed by the impeachment
provisions, which enable the Congress to remove
a president if he commits high crimes or misdemeanors,
which is generally understood to mean an abuse
of power.
JOHN YANG: So, is the standard -- the standard
is more than just the letter of the law?
Is there something broader that a counsel
looks at when advising the president on something
like the business holdings?
JACK QUINN: Sure.
Well, the White House counsel and others need
to look not just at the letter of the law,
but also at the power of the Congress, which
is equally broad, to invoke the impeachment
provisions, for example, if a president does
abuse the power.
Remember, the conflict of interest provision
simply says you can't participate in a decision
that would affect you or a member of your
family financially.
It doesn't mean that you can use the power
of government to influence this -- to create
decisions that would benefit you.
We're really in unchartered territory when
it comes to that.
That's not to presume that anything of this
kind will take place, but this is, as I say,
not a blank check.
I think it's an appropriate metaphor in this
case.
JOHN YANG: So, in addition to sort of the
ethics questions that the counsel looks at,
what other areas in sort of representing the
institutional interests of the presidency,
what other areas is the White House counsel
looking at?
JACK QUINN: Well, look, ultimately what one
wants to do is ensure that the American people
have faith in their government, in their president,
and everyone who works for their president.
So it is awfully important that the White
House counsel do everything possible to make
sure that the appearance of conflict, the
appearance of self-dealing is avoided.
That's critically important.
As I say, other officials, and the White House
counsel and the president himself need to
provide that assurance to the American people
as well.
JOHN YANG: You have been -- before you held
the office, you had been counsel to the vice
president, Al Gore at the time.
You had experience on the Hill, political
campaigns.
Is there anything that really can prepare
anyone for becoming White House counsel?
JACK QUINN: No.
There are so many things that come up in a
job like that that -- you know, when I walked
into the office the first time, I thought
there would be volumes on the shelves of prior
decisions.
It's not like that at all.
You do have the Office of Legal Counsel over
at the Justice Department that is helpful,
and you have a large staff of lawyers who
help you do the research necessary to make
good decisions.
But decisions come up all the time that are
novel, that have never come up before.
And, you know, you have to exercise good judgment,
again, remembering all of the time that you're
in a position of sacred trust, as are all
the other people around you, and ultimately
you have got to make a judgment that is in
the interest of the American people and the
conduct of good government.
JOHN YANG: And there is no manual, no handbook.
JACK QUINN: There is not.
JOHN YANG: Jack Quinn, thanks so much for
joining us.
JACK QUINN: You're so welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lost amid November's election
results was the large number of states that
legalized the use of marijuana for either
recreational or medical purposes.
The results spell one of the biggest shifts
in U.S. drug policy in decades, but significant
questions remain.
William Brangham has the story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Legalizing marijuana was
on the ballot in nine different states in
this past election.
And except in Arizona, they all passed.
Four states, Montana, North Dakota, Arkansas,
and Florida, voted to legalize use of marijuana
for certain medical conditions.
And four other states, Maine, Nevada, Massachusetts,
and California, legalized marijuana for anyone
21 years and over.
This means that millions more people will
be able to purchase marijuana in sanctioned
state-approved shops, but, according to federal
law, the drug is still illegal, and the Trump
administration could choose on day one tostart enforcing that law.
To help us understand the complexity of all
this, I'm joined now by Taylor West, who is
the deputy director of the National Cannabis
Industry Association, and John Hudak, who
studies drug policy, among other things, atthe Brookings Institution.
Welcome to you both.
Taylor, I would like to start with you first.
Election Day had to be an enormous day for
your industry.
Do you think of this as a tipping point going
forward?
TAYLOR WEST, Deputy Director, National Cannabis
Industry Association: Absolutely.
This was a watershed day for the industry
of cannabis, but also for cannabis policy
in the U.S.
We saw, as you said, eight states vote for
some form of legal, regulated marijuana program.
We now have 20 percent of the country living
in a state that has access to legal marijuana,
and more than 60 percent of the country living
in a state that has legal access to medical
marijuana.
This is in line with what we have seen from
public opinion polls, so it really does reflect
the direction that the country is moving on
these issues.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: John Hudak, tipping point?
Do you think this is just the inevitable roll
of this sort of policy going out across the
country?
JOHN HUDAK, Brookings Institution: This was
absolutely the biggest day of the marijuana
reform hands-down.
In terms of it being a tipping point, it's
a bit hard to tell.
I think, in the short term, we're not going
to see much movement at the federal level.
What happened in this election was big for
marijuana.
But what also happened was the status quo
in Congress, the same leadership in Congress,
who, frankly, is opposed to reform.
But what this change in the landscape of marijuana
policy can do is to start to embolden the
industry, to start to get the industry having
a stronger voice, a more powerful voice, and
a more powerful economic voice to eventually
move policy in the right direction toward
their interests in reform.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: John, staying with you,
I mean, as I mentioned in the introduction,
this is still illegal as far as the federal
government is concerned.
And the Obama administration put out a memo
basically saying to states, if you guys run
a tight ship, we're not going to interfere
in what you're doing.
Now, the Trump administration could come andundo that memo in an instant.
Do you think that we're going to see that?
What do you imagine when Trump takes over
that that administration is going to do with
regards to marijuana?
JOHN HUDAK: President-elect Trump has voiced
some interest in keeping the status quo when
it comes to medical marijuana.
His words around recreational marijuana have
been less firm.
So, I think, right now, we don't know for
sure what Donald Trump will do on marijuana.
I think that's true on a lot of policy areas,but it's true with marijuana.
I think his attorney general pick is one that
worries industry.
He's a vowed prohibitionist.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This is Jeff Sessions.
JOHN HUDAK: Jeff Sessions from Alabama.
He's someone who has injected subjective judgment
onto not just marijuana, but the marijuana
user.
So, I think however much leash that Donald
Trump gives his attorney general will determine
whether the Obama doctrine on marijuana holds
the day or whether we see a real transformation
back to years past.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Taylor, as John points out,
Jeff Sessions, who likely will be the attorney
general, has been very clear that he doesn't
like what states all over the country are
doing with regards to recreational marijuana.
Does your industry worry that, come January,
you might all of a sudden face federal enforcement?
TAYLOR WEST: It is certainly something that
we're keeping an eye on.
The fact is that, during the campaign, as
John mentioned, president-elect Trump said
on multiple occasions that he really did see
this as a state issue, and that programs in
the states that have been chosen by the voters
should be allowed to move forward.
Certainly, Senator Sessions has expressed
his personal opinion on issues around marijuana,
but the reality is that Senator Sessions has
also on many occasions been a strong advocate
of state sovereignty and the concept of federalism.
So I think there really is a nexus of agreement
there on the idea that a program chosen by
the voters of the state working in the way
that it's meant to ought to be respected.
Now, as John said, there's still some uncertainty
about exactly which direction any of these
policies will go, but we do see that sort
of path forward.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: John, let's take Taylor's
point.
Let's assume that the federal government doesn't
interfere.
Aren't we still going to see conflict, though,
between federal law and state law?
There are still other problems.
I mean, banks, for instance, can't take marijuana
money.
And that causes a huge problem for the industry.
Those things have got to get worked out eventually.
Right?
JOHN HUDAK: The reforms that have happened
during the Obama administration have allowed
the industry to really get up and running
and have cover, feel safe that what they are
going to do will be protected from federal
intervention.
But, at the same time, the Cole memos, which
have really taken this enforcement discretion
to a formal stance from the Obama administration
policy, does create these unintended consequences
around taxes, around banking, around interstate
access, around a variety of issues that can
be very challenging for the industry.
Those are going to need to be addressed eventually.
We just don't know when that will happen.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Taylor, we have seen already
Colorado and Washington have had a period
of time where their legalization infrastructure
has been built, their licensing, their taxing,
their selling.
Do those states' experience over the last
years or so give us any sense of how this
is going to go forward for other states thatare just trying this out?
TAYLOR WEST: Well, I think there are a couple
important lessons to take from what we have
seen in places like Colorado and Washington.
The biggest one is that, by and large, this
works, that these programs have been implemented
successfully.
We haven't seen the major issues that opponents
were concerned about.
The sky hasn't fallen.
And then a secondary lesson to that is that,
when there have been problems that have arisen,
the legislature and regulators have been able
to address them.
That's something that you don't get in an
unregulated system.
And I think that's an important thing for
states that are now embarking on these programs
to realize, that they have given themselves
the power to shape this industry in their
states as it grows.
So, those are things that I think are important,
both from the state implementation standpoint
and something that's important for the federalleaders to remember as well.
Turning back the clock on this doesn't just
end regulated sales.
It really sends them back into a criminal
market that we have very little control over.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: John, last question for
you.
What happens on the legal front?
If people are -- now have a criminal record
because of marijuana sales or possession,
or are in prison for marijuana sales or possession,
do these legalization schemes have any say
in that?
Does anyone get their record expunged or looked
at again?
JOHN HUDAK: Some of the legalization efforts
have put these issues at the forefront.
California, for instance, built into its initiative
the ability of individuals who were arrested
and charged with low-level marijuana offenses,
effectively what were formerly offenses that
would now be considered legal in California,
to go to court and ask for their record to
be expunged.
Now, those are very specific circumstances.
They obviously couldn't be done in conjunction
with violent crimes or larger crimes.
But these are issues that affect particularly
communities of color and create barriers to
economic opportunity, barriers to educational
opportunity, and have really long-term effects
on an individual who faces criminal justice
through this process.
And so some states have really spearheaded
the ability to do this, but as more states
have come online, that conversation has broadened
and these criminal justice reform issues have
become not dominant, but at least pushed to
the front of the line in terms of issues that
are talked about.
And I think that's a very important part of
this.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right.
John Hudak and Taylor West, thank you bothvery much for being here.
JOHN HUDAK: Thank you.
TAYLOR WEST: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": sharing the wealth
in this time of giving; one woman's mission
to improve education around the world; and
Pulitzer Prize-winning novelist Michael Chabon
on his new book.
But first to the analysis of Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist Mark Shields and
New York Times columnist David Brooks.
And we welcome both of you on this day after
Thanksgiving.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David is in Philadelphia.
Let's talk about -- we're getting -- beginning
to get a sense, Mark, of Donald Trump's administration,
a little sense.
He has named two more people today to the
White House.
What are we learning from this?
What are we -- what do you now understand
about him that we didn't understand before?
MARK SHIELDS: Not much.
I mean, I would say that there's been the
small Donald, the petty, vindictive Donald,
who can be rather mean-spirited, as he was
on display at The New York Times editorial
board meeting, where he gratuitously took
out after Kelly Ayotte, the former Republican
-- senior Republican senator in New Hampshire,
who had -- after the "Access Hollywood" tape
had refused to support Donald Trump and said
she couldn't get a job.
And then we see the little bit larger Donald
in hiring Nikki Haley, who had, in fact, backed
both Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz and in the national
address, in response -- the official Republican
response to the president's State of the Union,
had warned the party against following the
siren call of those -- it was a direct allusionto Donald Trump at the time.
So he was larger in spirit in choosing her.
And she certainly is a person who has demonstrated
leadership and character under stress at the
time of the massacre, the racial massacre
at the Mother Emanuel Church in Charleston
and leading in lowering the Confederate Battle
Flag over the state -- on the state capitol
grounds.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David?
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Excuse me.
I didn't mean to interrupt.
MARK SHIELDS: Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What are you learning about
Donald Trump from these appointments or announcements?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, I guess it's -- yes, of
some comfort, I guess.
Sometimes, the campaign seemed to be, as Mark
said, vindictive, but sort of a depraved three-ring
circus.
The transition period has not been that.
He's nominated people like DeVos or Haley
who are competent people, who are more or
less professional, experienced people.
They may not be, on substantive ground, all
of our cup of tea.
They are very consistent with the way he campaigned,
a nationalist campaign on education policy,
a campaign that is enthusiastic about school
choice.
But they are more or less the sort of professionalversion of Trump's ideology.
And I do think there is just this animating
spirit here to create a sort of nationalist,
populist conservatism that will in some ways
stretch the Republican Party and in some ways
offend a lot of conservatives.
But I think there is an animating vision here
to try to create a movement that will last
post-Trump, a populist movement that may even
try to span some of the dividing lines that
have existed so far through large economic
policies, through infrastructure policies,
through a tough anti-terror policy that nonetheless
keeps American troops out of war.
There's an animating vision here, and it's
being executed, at least in the appointments
so far, in some intellectually coherent way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, a movement in the making
maybe?
MARK SHIELDS: A movement in the making -- I
guess I don't share David's enthusiasm about
Betsy DeVos.
I mean, 90 percent of American schoolchildrenare in public schools, Judy.
And the emphasis on private schools and charter
schools and parochial schools is not unimportant.
I don't mean that, but we're at 90 percent.
We're heading to 91 percent will be in public
schools.
I'm not sure Betsy DeVos has ever spent a
day in a public school.
And I don't -- I'm pretty sure Donald Trump
hasn't.
So, I do look upon the secretary of education's
primary responsibility as the quality of education
that -- and improving the education that every
child in American public schools receives.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about that, David?
What about Betsy...
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Go ahead, yes.
First of all, charter schools are public schools.
They're paid for publicly and they're part
of the public system.
They just have a more independent structure.
And so I guess I would say, we need a reform
movement.
We have seen, I think, in the charter school
movement started out, whatever it was, 10
or 15 years ago -- it's increasingly gotten
better.
Charter schools are figuring out how to do
this.
The charter schools that are most effective
are scaling the most quickly, and so there's
got to be a continued move for reform.
At the same time, the teachers unions are
pushing at that reform, has had some political
successes.
And so I think charter schools, choice, and
frankly school standards need a champion.
And DeVos has been a good pretty champion.
Now, I don't -- she's not without fault.
You have got to have two things in education
reform.
You have got to have some flexibility, so
people can figure out what to do.
But you also have to have accountable, basically
what the Common Core standards were, some
sort of set of national standards, so we can
measure.
It's hard for parents just to measure schools.
DeVos has been really good at the flexibility.
She's not been enthusiastic about the accountability.
So, she's a complete -- an incomplete operator.
But I do think -- I have met her a few times.
She's a normal person, a sophisticated person,
in some ways a self-effacing person.
And she has been at least a champion of reform,
if maybe too much emphasizing choice, not
enough, in my view, emphasizing charters.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You want to come...
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
I mean, I just -- I applaud David's interest
in, enthusiasm for charter schools.
It's a very mixed record, and particularly
in Detroit, where that's -- the emphasis has
been.
It's less than mixed.
It's really discouraging.
And in the final analysis, American public
education -- American education will be determined
by the quality of American public education,
and that's public schools that are available.
The charter school is a possibility, an alternative
in certain circumstances, but not in most,
and not in most places, and not -- most parents
don't have either the time, the inclination
or the aptitude to sit and go through sifting
what school and what is available and what
the options are.
They are dependent upon the quality of theirneighborhood and local schools.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, I want to...
DAVID BROOKS: If I could just make...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Go ahead, yes.
DAVID BROOKS: ... one more point on that quickly.
MARK SHIELDS: OK.
DAVID BROOKS: Just, as I have traveled around
from school to school, whether it's project-based
learning or an outward bound curriculum, it's
very hard to tell the difference between charters
and public anymore.
There's no fine line.
They're often adopting very similar programs,
maybe with a different administrative structure.
But what I'm saying is, you're seeing reform
throughout the movement, in the so-called
charters, in the so-called publics, if we're
going to call them that.
And that reform dynamism has to be kept going.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, I also want to bring
up with both of you the questions I think
that came up day after day this last week
about Donald Trump's business connections,
his business -- deep business interests and
how that's going to work as president of the
United States.
It came up in John Yang's conversation just
now with Jack Quinn, the former White House
counsel.
How do you see that developing?
Do you see it as a problem?
Do you see it as something that Trump is going
to be able to handle?
What do you see?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I would invite viewers
to go back and read a book by a guy named
George Washington Plunkitt of Tammany Hall,
who had a concept called honest graft, where
his own public -- private interest corresponded
to public interest.
That's what Trumps seems to be advocating,
merging the two.
It's just bad news.
And I hope the new presumed White House counsel
will just say, this is not going to work.
You have got to have a bright line between
these two things.
We're no longer living in Tammany Hall America.
And it will just lead to scandal after scandal
that will end up hurting your own administration.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: I think David is absolutely
right, Judy.
I think it's very serious.
I mean, when the -- you have got 70 days between
the election and taking office, an enormous
responsibility.
And when you spend that time actually meeting
with Indian business investors for a Trump
apartment complex in Mumbai, when you meet
with Nigel Farage and raise the question of
eliminating the wind farm because it would
hurt the view at Donald Trump's golf course
in Scotland and urges a change in policy,
I mean, this is the man who doesn't understand
the difference between public policy, publictrust and private interest.
When you see Ivanka Trump hawking the $10,000
bracelet that she wore on the "60 Minutes"
broadcast from her jewelry -- presidential
trust is something, Judy, that's perishable
and it's precious.
And once a president loses it, it's not a
question of whether it's conflict of interests
laws or there aren't conflict of interests
laws.
The president has to have the trust, earn
the trust, maintain the trust of people in
order to lead.
And there's nothing that will lose it quicker
than a sense that he's in it for a quick buck.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, do you want to add anything
on that?
Because I do want to move on to what is apparently
-- what seems to be a split inside Trump world
over who is going to be secretary of state.
We saw Kellyanne Conway, who has been sort
of the face of the Trump transition, tweeting
openly just yesterday that they're picking
up a lot of criticism about the fact that
he's considering Mitt Romney.
What does this tell us about folks inside
Trump world who may be dismayed at where Donald
Trump is headed?
DAVID BROOKS: I'm looking forward to the live
tweets of the Oval Office meetings in the
Trump administration.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: There's certainly a lot of chaos
and openness that they're saying so far.
I think Trump is sort of -- from what we can
see from his comments, sort of attracted to
the idea of a Romney.
He looks the part, as Trump -- looks are veryimportant to Donald Trump.
And so -- but I do think there is some sign
of respectability.
Personally, I think Mitt Romney would be agreat secretary of state.
He knows a lot.
He's a very professional -- a consummate professional.
Frankly, if I were Donald Trump, I would be
a little suspicious.
It's very easy to imagine he's got his America
first crew in the National Security Council.
Mitt Romney's a more internationalist.
It's easy to see him setting up a foreign
policy establishment over there in the State
Department that would be a rival to the White
House, and maybe that's a good thing.
But, if I were Donald Trump, it's not necessarily
what I would want in my foreign policy apparatus.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you think of the split?
MARK SHIELDS: Now that David has sunk Mitt
Romney's chances...
(LAUGHTER)
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: ... separate entity over at
the State Department.
To me, it's fascinating.
It's a choice.
Trump loves loyalty.
He prizes loyalty, who was with him.
Rudy was with him.
Rudy, you will recall, was the moderate Republican
mayor of New York who was for immigration
rights, for gun control, for abortion rights,
for gay rights.
He abandoned those positions to endorse Donald
Trump after a disastrous run for president
and gave a speech at the convention that sounded
like a New York cab driver stuck in traffic
at 4:30 in the afternoon.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: It was a rant.
He went on, Judy, to say, if you will recall,
eight years before -- eight years prior to
Barack Obama coming in, there were no attacks
on the United States, and they all began when
Obama and Clinton took office, conveniently
forgetting completely the tragedy, the national
tragedy of 9/11.
So, there are questions and doubts about Rudy
Giuliani and his competence for the job.
But there's no question that Newt Gingrich
is out for him.
Kellyanne Conway is apparently advocating
and championing for him.
So, this is -- this is a split.
I agree with David that Mitt Romney does fit
the bill.
He looks like a secretary of state.
He looks like the chancellor of the exchequer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A lot of people said he would
look like a president.
MARK SHIELDS: He looks like a president.
I mean, he really does.
He's central casting.
You want a leader, Western leader, English-speaking?
Mitt Romney.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, just a quick minute-and-a-half
on the Democrats.
We are going to reserve just a moment for
them.
David, we're seeing Chuck Schumer, the incoming
Democratic leader in the Senate, saying, we,
the Democrats, need to look at ways possiblyto work with Donald Trump.
And then, on the other hand, we're seeing
Congressman Keith Ellison, who is up for running
for head of the Democratic Party, the Democratic
National Committee say, Mark, say, no, we're
not going to be working with him, and I don't
want to hear about it.
David, are the Democrats making the rightkind of noises right now?
Or do we just wait and see what happens?
DAVID BROOKS: I think Schumer is right to
keep the possibility open that Trump is movable
on some issues, which is clearly what Obama
believes, and that they can work with him
on some issues, like infrastructure or something
like that.
So, I think, if they could have a good six
months where they work together, there will
be plenty of time for fighting later on.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: David is right.
And I think the worst thing the Democrats
could do is to follow the playbook that Mitch
McConnell and the Republicans adopted in 2009
against Barack Obama.
And that's just total, all-out obstructionism.
JUDY WOODRUFF: To say on day one or day two...
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, that's right, the most
important thing is to defeat him for reelection.
I think that America has had enough of it.
It doesn't work.
And it's not the best of the Democratic tradition.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Shields, David Brooks,
thank you very much.
Next: On what the stores call Black Friday,
the unofficial launch of the holiday shopping
season, special correspondent Mike Cerre reports
on a growing effort to expand the scope of
seasonal giving to include charitable causes,
with a focus on one company turning bombs
into bracelets.
MIKE CERRE: Looking to escape the holiday
shopping madness, to give something more unique
and meaningful this year?
This coming Giving Tuesday, you can buy a
goat online through CARE USA to help an African
family in need, or, closer to home, perhaps
some school supplies for your neighborhood
school through DonorsChoose.com.
For something a little more exotic, how about
jewelry handmade in Laos out of unexploded
bombs to help the Mines Advisory Group clear
UXOs?
HENRY TIMMS, Founder, Giving Tuesday: We know
about Black Friday.
We know about Cyber Monday.
We know they help stimulate our economy.
But it felt like there was a missing gap.
It felt like there was a moment to talk about
philanthropy and giving.
MAN: For the arts.
MIKE CERRE: It's called the giving season
for a reason.
December is typically the most important month
for nonprofits all over the country.
Henry Timms started this online philanthropy
event four years ago out of New York's 92nd
Street Y.
Giving Tuesday is now celebrated in over 30
countries.
Last year, over 700,000 holiday shoppers pledged
more than $110 million to their favorite charities,
big and small.
HENRY TIMMS: One of the things we have always
seen -- and we see it more now with social
media -- is the kind of fluidity of giving.
So people are able to form movements quickly
around campaigns and causes they care about.
I think we have already seen that post-election.
We have seen lots of different groups thathave seen spikes in giving.
ELIZABETH SUDA, Article 22: And each piece
helps clear some of the 80 million bombs that
haven't yet exploded.
I think our jewelry has this multilayered
impact, where the giver is consciously choosing
something that has benefits for the people
that make it.
We will still continue to use these hand tools.
MIKE CERRE: We first discovered Elizabeth
Suda and her jewelry made from UXOs during
President Obama's state visit to Laos in September,
when he pledged to nearly double the amount
of money the U.S. spends each year cleaning
up UXOs, unexploded ordnance, dropped during
the Vietnam War.
ELIZABETH SUDA: This is actually a cluster
bomb known as the pineapple, and it has aluminum
fins here and then other aluminum components.
They are also able to make plane parts hammered
down and put in the kiln, and you can actually
get quite a few bracelets out of various pieces.
The pieces really started as conversation
starters.
The idea was to buy back the bombs and help
clear unexploded ordnance, and give people
an entry point into a conversation about what
might otherwise be a forgotten part of history.
MIKE CERRE: More than four decades since the
end of the Vietnam War, neighboring Laos is
still littered with UXOs, unexploded ordnance,
which continue to kill and maim civilians,
mostly children, and even some of these jewelry
makers, like this one, who lost an eye as
a boy.
Proceeds from the sale of jewelry on Giving
Tuesday and throughout the year goes to MAG,
the Mines Advisory Group, to safely clear
the artisans' fields of these still dangerous
legacies of war.
HENRY TIMMS: And the thing we have seen happen
over and over again is the most creative campaigns
are coming from some of the smallest institutions,
right?
what we often see is, those with the fewest
resources actually thinking of some really
smart ideas to try and think about how to
approach Giving Tuesday in new ways.
MIKE CERRE: Giving Tuesday and recycling bombs
into jewelry isn't as much about anti-consumerism
as it is about buying, making and selling
stuff that benefits others and extends the
gratification that comes from gift-giving
beyond the holidays.
ELIZABETH SUDA: The Love Is a Bomb pieces,
I believe, are $185.
People are shopping for holiday gifts that
they're going to give to somebody that they
love or that they care about.
And the jewelry that we offer is a symbol
of that love, both in terms of it being a
gift, but in terms of the story that it carries.
MIKE CERRE: Charlie Decker discovered the
story and Article 22's holiday booth in New
York's Union Square and bought a matching
set of wedding rings made from bombs to give
something back this holiday season.
CHARLIE DECKER, Consumer: Hoping that, you
know, all the wounds get healed, and this
is our little piece that we had to play in
it.
MIKE CERRE: For the "PBS NewsHour," Mike Cerre,
reporting from New York.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now another installment of
our entrepreneur series.
Emily Feistritzer, who was a Catholic nun
in her youth, later became a teacher.
In 2011, she created TEACH-NOW, a company
that trains and certifies teachers around
the world.
It is now a multimillion-dollar business.
William Brangham returns, having caught up
with Feistritzer in her Washington, D.C.,
home.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For Emily Feistritzer, lifeas an entrepreneur began early.
As a young girl growing up in Kentucky, she
went door to door in her mostly Protestant
neighborhood.
EMILY FEISTRITZER, CEO, TEACH-NOW: Selling
statues of the Virgin Mary that glowed in
the dark.
(LAUGHTER)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That was your first business?
EMILY FEISTRITZER: Yes, my first business.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That business never took
off, but it led to her next stop, the Catholic
convent.
At 19, she became a nun, and got her first
job in education, teaching high school math
and science.
EMILY FEISTRITZER: I would never, ever be
doing what I'm doing today if I hadn't learned
the kind of focus and discipline that that
life provided.
I mean, you were taught to be laser-focused.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And you really do trace
it back to your time in the convent?
EMILY FEISTRITZER: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
There's no question about that.
People sort of say, where did you get your
training to be a successful businesswoman?
And I say, the convent.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: She left the convent, and
the Catholic Church, at 31, earned a Ph.D
and launched a career in education that hasspanned more than four decades.
She was a professor.
She wrote books on teacher training, started
a clearinghouse on best practices.
And then, a few years ago, she plopped down
half-a-million dollars of her own money to
launch a brand-new digital company.
You could very easily have just said, you
know what, it's time.
I'm going to have a peaceful retirement andjust enjoy the end of your life.
Instead, you dove into what may be, arguably,
the most intense period of work in your life.
Why?
EMILY FEISTRITZER: Well, I was sort of playing
around with retiring.
I was already getting a Social Security check,and I really didn't like it.
I have to be engaged in something.
And I didn't want to, like, do pottery.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That decision has more than
paid off.
Today, her company, known as TEACH-NOW, has
15 full-time employees, and more than 40 part-time
instructors around the world.
EMILY FEISTRITZER: It's now bringing in revenues
of around $4 million and a profit margin of
about 20 percent, 20-25 percent.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: TEACH-NOW charges $6,000
per person to take its nine-month teacher-certification
program.
That's a cheaper and faster alternative to
what most traditional universities offer.
And since it began, more than 1,200 peoplehave completed the course.
Classrooms look like this.
Students log in virtually anywhere in the
world.
And lessons are given by veteran teachers.
Dan Roggenkamp lives and works in Taiwan.
He's leading this discussion.
DAN ROGGENKAMP, Teacher: So, we're looking
for as little redundancy in information as
possible.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Before completion, however,
people like Walter Allen must spend at least
12 weeks in a real classroom, where they are
filmed and monitored by mentors online.
WALTER ALLEN, Teacher: As a teacher, it helps
a lot.
Like, I know a lot of first-year teachers
personally who didn't have to undergo any
field experience prior to getting hired, and
sometimes that first year is like a disaster.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Allen is teaching reading
intervention at Kelley Miller Middle School
in Washington, D.C.
It's a class designed to help students whohave fallen behind in English.
He's aiming to not only be certified as a
special-ed instructor, but he also wants do
something much bigger.
WALTER ALLEN: Growing up, going to D.C. public
schools, elementary, middle school, high school,
I didn't -- personally, I didn't have many
African-American teachers, African-American
male teachers.
So, enrolling into the TEACH-NOW program,
taking education seriously, graduating from
college, furthering my education, all of this
allows me to become that idea, that possibility
for African-American students that I teach
now.
They see me inside of their classroom teaching
as an African-American male teacher and say,
hey, maybe, one day, I can become a teacher.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Kerri Valencia is an elementary
Spanish teacher in Washington, D.C.'s Sheridan
School.
She completed the TEACH-NOW certification
three years ago while living in Ecuador, where
she was teaching English at an international
school.
Valencia had a bachelor's degree in Spanish,
but thought that wasn't going to be enough
to land her a teaching job back in the U.S.
KERRI VALENCIA, Teacher: And I was just really
drawn to the fact that it was a nine-month
program.
I have a family.
I wasn't in a place where I could go back
and do another four-year degree or two-year
degree, which is kind of what looked my options
were.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Feistritzer says she's met
several teachers like Valencia, who came to
the profession late or had been working, but
without certification.
EMILY FEISTRITZER: So there's really been
a groundswell of interest in teaching on a
part of mid-career switchers, people who've
raised a family and decided to do a career
later in life, people who want to move in
and out of careers.
So, that market, I saw coming.
When you run the kind of program we're running,
which is not only so good, but it can be taken
anywhere, any time, it's very desirable.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As for what the future may
have in store, Feistritzer says she's keeping
an open mind, even to another business opportunity
coming up.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm William Brangham
in Washington, D.C.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight: the "NewsHour"
Bookshelf.
Jeffrey Brown sits down with Pulitzer Prize-winning
author Michael Chabon about his new book,
"Moonglow," and the blending of fact and fiction
in literary art.
JEFFREY BROWN: "Moonglow," a classic tune
performed by Benny Goodman, background music
in the Berkeley, California, writing studio
of Michael Chabon, where he often works deep
into the night.
"Moonglow" is also the title of Chabon's new
book.
A novel, it's presented as a kind of memoir,
blurring the lines between truth and fiction.
MICHAEL CHABON, Author, "Moonglow": You're
telling a lie when you're writing a novel.
A novel is a lie.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
Right.
MICHAEL CHABON: It's the only good kind of
lie.
It's the lie that you're telling to someone
with their permission, and not only with their
permission, but at their invitation.
So, the reader comes to the novel and says,
lie to me.
I want to hear it.
Like, tell me a story.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
You, the author, say, let me tell you a good
lie.
MICHAEL CHABON: Exactly.
And that's part of what is so beautiful about
that particular relationship, is that it's
a kind of voluntary permission to deception,
just like with magic.
JEFFREY BROWN: In this case, the magic started
with an actual ad he found from a 1958 "Esquire"
magazine for something called Chabon Scientific
Company that sold models of missiles that
you can fly.
MICHAEL CHABON: My name, C-H-A-B-O-N, if that's
your last name, you're related to me somehow.
And there aren't very many Chabons in the
world.
JEFFREY BROWN: But this Chabon had never heard
of that company.
No one had.
So, he invented its story as part of "Moonglow."
MICHAEL CHABON: I defy anyone using Google
to contradict anything I say about the history
of Chabon Scientific Company in my book.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Because there ain't no history.
MICHAEL CHABON: Not yet.
I mean, they may come forward.
JEFFREY BROWN: There is now.
MICHAEL CHABON: The real -- the defendants
of the founding Chabon of that company may
emerge to tell their version of the story.
But, until that happens, Google can't help
you.
You're at my mercy.
JEFFREY BROWN: Then there was this man, Chabon's
real grandfather, who on his deathbed, under
the influence of painkilling drugs, began
telling his then-26-year-old grandson unknown
stories from his life.
This too became fodder for the novel.
MICHAEL CHABON: There is all this stuff I
was hearing that was clearly still there,
you know, that was in his mind, in his memory,
in his experience, in his life, that I had
never heard before.
And it just was all kind of coming out.
And I thought, like, you think you know somebody.
You think you have heard their stories.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
MICHAEL CHABON: And then to suddenly, at the
very end, get this glimpse of an entire other
life that I had never heard of before, not
that it was a life of dark secrets or anything
like that, but just there was so much more,
so much more.
JEFFREY BROWN: But then that opens the floodgates
for you, and you, being a novelist, get to
play, right?
MICHAEL CHABON: That's what I do with every
book.
That procedure of taking bits and pieces of
an element of lived experience, of stories
I have heard, anecdotes and research or whatever
it might be gets all swirled together with
the invention.
The reader wants to hear the lie that sounds
true and ultimately, I think, in the case
of fiction, in the case of a novel, that delivers
a truth -- a truth.
JEFFREY BROWN: To see Chabon's studio is to
peek into the brain that produces that invention,
action figures, vintage science fiction and
fantasy novels, vinyl records, much of it
connected to things he's written, from the
Pulitzer-Prize winning "Adventures of Kavalier
& Clay" to now the mash-up of "Moonglow,"
which explores war, family and technology
in mid-century America and mixes historicalfigures with the fictional.
War, rocketry, space travel, even -- you and
I have talked about this before when you're
writing some of it, genre-bending.
You know, it's a sort of memoir, but it getssort of into almost fantasy.
MICHAEL CHABON: Love among people in their
golden years.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
Yes.
A lot of things going on there.
But that allows you the freedom.
Once you have that freedom, you're off.
Right?
MICHAEL CHABON: Right.
And that's what it's all about.
The facts are so dull.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: So dull?
MICHAEL CHABON: We turn to fiction, we turn
to a novel because fiction persuades us.
All art persuades us that there is a pattern
to life, that there is meaning to life, that
if you look at life the right way, you can
see sense in it, you can find meaning in it.
It might not be true.
Maybe that's an illusion.
Maybe that's like the greatest illusion of
the magic act of literature, but I don't care.
That's what is good about it.
That's what we turn to it for.
JEFFREY BROWN: The new novel is "Moonglow."
Michael Chabon, thank you for letting us visit.
MICHAEL CHABON: Oh, absolutely.
Thank you, Jeff.
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Online, a 22-year-old Syrian
refugee tells the story of how he fled his
war-torn home for the Netherlands, where he
helps other refugees rebuild their lives.
Plus, has Black Friday become less relevant?
Our partners from The Conversation tackle
the question.
All that and more is on our Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And tonight on "Washington Week": a roundtable
discussion focusing on Donald Trump's administration
picks and the future of the Democratic Party.
That's later this evening on most PBS stations.
On tomorrow's edition of "PBS NewsHour Weekend,"
Jeffrey Brown sits down with singer-songwriter
Norah Jones to talk about her evolving craft,
her signature voice, and her musical roots.
JEFFREY BROWN: Everything I see about this
new album, including in the publicity, it
says Norah Jones is returning to her jazz
roots.
Do you buy that?
Or what do you think is going on here?
NORAH JONES, Singer-Songwriter: I definitely
think it's accurate.
That's now how I would describe what I'm doing,
because I feel like I'm moving forward, as
I do with every album, you know?
But I definitely have been playing more piano
again.
And I don't know.
Music -- man, it's just music.
Just listen to it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Jones was at ease at the Brooklyn
Conservatory of Music recently, not far from
where she lives now with a family of her own.
Marriage and motherhood, right, no doubt changes
your life.
NORAH JONES: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Does it change your music?
NORAH JONES: I don't think necessarily think
that my music is -- I don't go about playing
music differently.
It changes my sleeping schedule and my drinking
habits.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's tomorrow night on "PBS
NewsHour Weekend."
And we will be back right here on Monday with
a look at the far-right movement in France.
That's the "NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and good night.